.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.\" First parameter, NAME, should be all caps
.\" Second parameter, SECTION, should be 1-8, maybe w/ subsection
.\" other parameters are allowed: see man(7), man(1)
.TH DDRESCUE 1 "April 16, 2003"
.\" Please adjust this date whenever revising the manpage.
.\"
.\" Some roff macros, for reference:
.\" .nh        disable hyphenation
.\" .hy        enable hyphenation
.\" .ad l      left justify
.\" .ad b      justify to both left and right margins
.\" .nf        disable filling
.\" .fi        enable filling
.\" .br        insert line break
.\" .sp <n>    insert n+1 empty lines
.\" for manpage-specific macros, see man(7)
.SH NAME
dd_rescue \- copies data from one file (or block device) to another
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dd_rescue
.RI [ options ] " infile outfile"
.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual page documents briefly the
.B dd_rescue command.
This manual page was written for the Debian distribution
because the original program does not have a manual page.
.PP
.\" TeX users may be more comfortable with the \fB<whatever>\fP and
.\" \fI<whatever>\fP escape sequences to invode bold face and italics,
.\" respectively.
\fBdd_rescue\fP is a program that copies data from one file or block
device to another, it is a tool to help you to save data from crashed partition.
It tries to read and if it fails it will go on with the next sectors,
where tools like dd will fail. If the copying process is interrupted
by the user it is possible to continue at any position later.
It can copy backwards.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-s ipos
start position in  input file (default=0)
.TP
.B \-S opos
start position in output file (def=ipos)
.TP
.B \-b softbs
block size for copy operation (def=16384)
.TP
.B \-B hardbs
fallback block size in case of errs (def=512)
.TP
.B \-e maxerr
exit after maxerr errors (def=0=infinite)
.TP
.B \-m maxxfer
maximum amount of data to be transfered (def=0=inf)
.TP
.B \-l logfile
name of a file to log errors and summary to (def="")
.TP
.B \-r
reverse direction copy (def=forward)
.TP
.B \-t
truncate output file (def=no)
.TP
.B \-w
abort on Write errors (def=no)
.TP
.B \-a
spArse file writing (def=no)
.TP
.B \-A
Always write blocks, zeroed if err (def=no)
.TP
.B \-i
interactive: ask before overwriting data (def=no)
.TP
.B \-f
force: skip some sanity checks (def=no)
.TP
.B \-q
quiet operation
.TP
.B \-v
verbose operation
.TP
.B \-V
display version and exit
.TP
.B \-h
Show summary of options
.br
.SH AUTHOR
This manual page was written by Ayman Negm <a.negm@hamburg.de>,
for the Debian project (but may be used by others).
