.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.\" First parameter, NAME, should be all caps
.\" Second parameter, SECTION, should be 1-8, maybe w/ subsection
.\" other parameters are allowed: see man(7), man(1)
.TH SBMINST 8 "17 Mar 2001" "SBM Installer" "Linux System Administrator's Manual"
.\" Please adjust this date whenever revising the manpage.
.\"
.\" Some roff macros, for reference:
.\" .nh        disable hyphenation
.\" .hy        enable hyphenation
.\" .ad l      left justify
.\" .ad b      justify to both left and right margins
.\" .nf        disable filling
.\" .fi        enable filling
.\" .br        insert line break
.\" .sp <n>    insert n+1 empty lines
.\" for manpage-specific macros, see man(7)
.SH NAME
sbminst - program to install Smart Boot Manager
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B sbminst
.RI [ options ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual page documents briefly the
.B sbminst
command.
This manual page was written for the Debian GNU/Linux distribution
because the original program does not have a manual page.
Instead, it has documentation in the GNU Info format; see below.
.PP
.\" TeX users may be more comfortable with the \fB<whatever>\fP and
.\" \fI<whatever>\fP escape sequences to invode bold face and italics, 
.\" respectively.
\fBsbminst\fP is a program that installs the Smart Boot Manager
to your hard disk or to your floppy.
.SH OPTIONS
For a description, see the Info files and the files under
/usr/share/doc/Packages/sbm.
.SH SEE ALSO
You can find the real documentation at /usr/share/doc/Packages/sbm
.SH AUTHOR
This manual page was written by RISKO Gergely <risko@debian.org>,
for the Debian GNU/Linux system (but may be used by others).
