.TH COLORGCC 1 "Jan 15, 2003"

.SH NAME
colorgcc \- colorization wrapper for gcc

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B colorgcc
[\fIOPTION\fP]...
[\fIFILENAME\fP]...

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B colorgcc
acts as a wrapper around
.BR gcc (1)
to ease reading its output by colorizing it.

.SH OPTIONS
Since
.B colorgcc
is a wrapper around
.BR gcc (1),
it has the same command line options as
.BR gcc (1).

.SH USAGE
At your shell prompt, set your CC environment variable to 'colorgcc'.
This may be done in several different ways, depending on what
shell you use.
.PP
In a Bourne-compatible shell (bash, ash, zsh, pdksh), type:
.br
\fBexport CC="colorgcc"\fP
.PP
In a C shell variant (csh, tcsh), type:
.br
\fBsetenv CC "colorgcc"\fP
.PP
Refer to your shell's documentation for more information on setting
environment variables.

.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/colorgcc/colorgccrc
System-wide configuration file for colorgccrc.
.TP
.I $HOME/.colorgccrc
Personal configuration file for colorgccrc.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR gcc (1),
.BR colorgccrc (5)

.SH HISTORY
Jan 15 2003: Initial version of this manual-page.

.SH REPORTING BUGS
Report bugs to
<\fIjmoyers@geeks.com\fP>

.SH AUTHORS
Jamie Moyers <\fIjmoyers@geeks.com\fP> is the author of colorgcc.
.PP
This manual page was written by Joe Wreschnig <\fIpiman@sacredchao.net\fP>,
and modified by David Weinehall <\fItao@debian.org\fP>, for the
Debian GNU/Linux system (but may be used by others).

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2003 Jamie Moyers
.br
This is free software; see the source for copying conditions.
There is NO warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR
A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
