.\" Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.\" First parameter, NAME, should be all caps
.\" Second parameter, SECTION, should be 1-8, maybe w/ subsection
.\" other parameters are allowed: see man(7), man(1)
.\" Please adjust this date whenever revising the manpage.
.\" 
.\" Some roff macros, for reference:
.\" .nh        disable hyphenation
.\" .hy        enable hyphenation
.\" .ad l      left justify
.\" .ad b      justify to both left and right margins
.\" .nf        disable filling
.\" .fi        enable filling
.\" .br        insert line break
.\" .sp <n>    insert n+1 empty lines
.\" for manpage-specific macros, see man(7)
.TH "atris" "1" "September 4, 2004" "Pascal Giard" ""
.SH "NAME"
.LP 
atris \- Tetris\-like game with a twist for Unix
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.LP 
atris [\fIoptions\fR]

.SH "DESCRIPTION"
Alizarin Tetris includes multi\-player support, user\-extensible color, shape and sound styles, can use TCP/IP networking and features a few different AI opponents.
.SH "OPTIONS"
.LP 
.TP 
\fB\-h, \-\-help\fR
Command line help.

.TP 
\fB\-b, \-\-bg\fR
Flaming background (default).

.TP 
\fB\-n, \-\-noflame\fR
No flaming background.

.TP 
\fB\-s, \-\-sound\fR              
Enable sound effects (default).

.TP 
\fB\-q, \-\-quiet\fR
No sound effects.

.TP 
\fB\-w, \-\-window\fR
Windowed display (default).

.TP 
\fB\-f, \-\-fullscreen\fR         
Full\-screen display.

.TP 
\fB\-d=<\fIX\fP>, \-\-depth=<\fIX\fP>\fR          
Set color depth (bpp) to X.

.TP 
\fB\-r=<\fIX\fP>, \-\-repeat=<\fIX\fP>\fR
Set the keyboard repeat delay to X (1 = Slow Repeat, 16 = Fast Repeat).
.SH "EXAMPLES"
.LP 
To run this game the standard way, type:
.LP 
# atris &
.LP 
To run this game in fullscreen mode, type:
.LP 
# atris \-\-fullscreen &
.SH "AUTHOR"
.TP 
This manual page was written by Pascal Giard <evilynux@yahoo.com> for the Debian GNU/Linux system (but may be used by others).
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.LP 
.TP 
Atris home page
http://www.cs.berkeley.edu/~weimer/atris/
