.\" Jean II - HPL - 03
.\" irnet.4
.\"
.TH IRNET 4 "2 May 2003" "irda-utils" "Linux-IrDA man pages"
.\"
.\" NAME part
.\"
.SH NAME
irnet \- IrNET protocol device
.\"
.\" DESCRIPTION part
.\"
.SH DESCRIPTION
File
.B /dev/irnet
is used to access and configure the IrNET protocol part of the
Linux-IrDA stack.
.PP
.B IrNET
is a protocol allowing to create
.I TCP/IP connections
between two IrDA peers in an efficient fashion, and generally to
enable standard networking over IrDA. It is a thin layer, passing PPP
packets to IrTTP and vice versa. It uses
.I PPP
in synchronous mode, because IrTTP offer a reliable sequenced packet
service (as opposed to a byte stream). In fact, you could see IrNET as
carrying TCP/IP in a IrDA socket, using PPP to provide the glue.
.PP
The main difference with traditional
.I PPP over IrCOMM
is that it avoids the framing and serial emulation which are a
performance bottleneck. It also allows multipoint communications in a
sensible fashion. And finally, it can automatically handle incomming
connections through
.B irnetd.
.PP
The main difference with
.I IrLAN
is that we use PPP for the link management, which is more standard,
interoperable and flexible than the IrLAN protocol. For example, PPP
adds authentication, encryption, compression, header compression and
automated routing setup. And, as IrNET let PPP do the hard work, the
implementation is much simpler than IrLAN.
.PP
.B IrNET
connections are initiated and managed with
.IR pppd (8).
File
.B /dev/irnet
also offer a
.IR "control channel" .
Reads from
.B /dev/irnet
will return various
.IR "IrNET events" .
Write to
.B /dev/irnet
allow to
.I configure
the IrNET connection.
.\"
.\" CONFIGURATION part
.\"
.SH CONFIGURATION
If your system does not have
.B /dev/irnet
created already, it can be created with the following commands:
.nf

        mknod -m 644 /dev/irnet c 10 187
        chown root:root /dev/irnet
.fi
.PP
You will also need to have IrNET support in your kernel or as module
and the Linux-IrDA stack installed and configured (see 
.IR irattach (8)).
.PP
File
.B /dev/irnet
is supposed to only be used with the
.I PPP line discipline
or for accessing the 
.IR "control channel" ,
other use are unsupported.
.B IrNET
support multiple concurent connections (limited by the IrDA stack),
all those connections are multiplexed on a single
.B /dev/irnet
device (as opposed to IrCOMM which as one device per connection).
.\"
.\" PARAMETER part
.\"
.SH PARAMETERS
Writing commands to
.B /dev/irnet
allow to
.I configure
the IrNET connection being made. This need to be done through
.IR pppd (8)
(see below for examples). Commands are separated by comas.
.TP
.BI name " <peer>"
Connect to the IrDA device which IrDA nickname is
.IR <peer> .
The IrDA nickname is a string up to 31 characters.
.TP
.BI daddr " <peer>"
Connect to the IrDA device which IrDA address is
.IR <peer> .
The IrDA address is a 32 bits hexadecimal number.
.TP
.BI raddr " <port>"
Restrict connections to the local IrDA interface which IrDA address is
.IR <port> .
The IrDA address is a 32 bits hexadecimal number.
.\"
.\" DISPLAY part
.\"
.SH DISPLAY
Reading from
.B /dev/irnet
will show various
.IR "IrNET events" .
This is usually done with the command
.IR "cat /dev/irnet" .
.TP
.B Found
Dump of the current IrNET discovery log.
.TP
.B Discovered 
New IrNET device discovered.
.TP
.B Expired
Previously discovered IrNET device no longer present.
.TP
.B Connected to 
This computer successfully established an IrNET connection to a peer.
.TP
.B Connection from 
A peer successfully established an IrNET connection to this computer.
.TP
.B Request from
A peer attempted to connect to this computer, but no IrNET connection
was waiting for it.
.TP
.B No-answer from
This computer attempted to connect to a peer, but no IrNET connection
was waiting for it.
.TP
.B Blocked link with
The IrDA link of the IrNET connection is currently blocked.
.TP
.B Disconnection from
A peer successfully terminated an IrNET connection with this computer.
.TP
.B Disconnected to
This computer successfully terminated an IrNET connection with a peer.
.PP
File
.B /proc/net/irda/irnet
will also show the current state of the various IrNET connections.
.\"
.\" EXAMPLE part
.\"
.SH EXAMPLE
Start a IrNET server accepting any incomming connection:
.br
.B "	pppd /dev/irnet 9600 local noauth nolock passive"
.PP
Start a IrNET client connecting to any IrDA peer:
.br
.B "	pppd /dev/irnet 9600 local noauth nolock"
.PP
Start a IrNET client connecting to the IrDA peer called
.IR MyIrDANode :
.br
.B "	pppd /dev/irnet 9600 local noauth nolock connect ""echo name MyIrDANode""
.PP
Start a IrNET server accepting incomming connection from peer with IrDA address 0x12345678 only on IrDA port 0x87654321:
.br
.B "	pppd /dev/irnet 9600 local noauth nolock passive connect ""echo daddr 0x12345678 , saddr 0x87654321"""
.\"
.\" AUTHOR part
.\"
.SH AUTHOR
Jean Tourrilhes \- jt@hpl.hp.com
.\"
.\" FILES part
.\"
.SH FILES
.I /dev/irnet
.br
.I /proc/net/irda/irnet
.\"
.\" SEE ALSO part
.\"
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR irda (7),
.BR irnetd (8),
.BR pppd (8),
.BR irattach (8),
.BR irdadump (8).
